=== START OF ABIDES ===
ABIDES: TOWARDS HIGH-FIDELITY MARKET SIMULATION
FOR AI RESEARCH
A PREPRINT
David Byrd
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30308
db@gatech.edu
Maria Hybinette
Department of Computer Science
The University of Georgia
Athens, GA 30303
maria@cs.uga.edu
Tucker Hybinette Balch
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30308
tucker@cc.gatech.edu
ABSTRACT
We introduce ABIDES, an Agent-Based Interactive Discrete Event Simulation environment. ABIDES
is designed from the ground up to support AI agent research in market applications. While simulations
are certainly available within trading ﬁrms for their own internal use, there are no broadly available
high-ﬁdelity market simulation environments. We hope that the availability of such a platform will
facilitate AI research in this important area. ABIDES currently enables the simulation of tens of
thousands of trading agents interacting with an exchange agent to facilitate transactions. It supports
conﬁgurable pairwise network latencies between each individual agent as well as the exchange. Our
simulator’s message-based design is modeled after NASDAQ’s published equity trading protocols
ITCH and OUCH. We introduce the design of the simulator and illustrate its use and conﬁguration
with sample code, validating the environment with example trading scenarios. The utility of ABIDES
is illustrated through experiments to develop a market impact model. We close with discussion of
future experimental problems it can be used to explore, such as the development of ML-based trading
algorithms.
1
Background
We have developed ABIDES, an agent-based interactive discrete event simulation, to facilitate the creation, deployment,
and study of strategic agents in a highly conﬁgurable market environment. We were inspired by Daniel Freidman’s view
that simulation provides a powerful tool to analyze individual participant behavior as well as overall market outcomes
that emerge from the interaction of the individual agents. In Freidman’s review of empirical approaches to the analysis
of continuous double auction (CDA) markets such as NASDAQ and the New York Stock Exchange, he outlines the
strengths and weaknesses of three major approaches:
1. Field studies of actual operating markets,
2. Laboratory studies of small controlled markets,
3. Computer simulation of markets.
Freidman concludes that ﬁeld studies are clearly relevant, but do not provide experimental access to all relevant
information; laboratory studies improve control and observation, but are of necessity small and expensive; and computer
simulations feature perfect control and observation. However “trader’s strategies are not endogenously chosen, but
rather must be speciﬁed exogenously” [2].
As Freidman observed, market simulations provide an attractive platform for research in equity trading questions. This
has led to the development of a number of simulation platforms such as those on which X. Wang and Wellman [9]
and J. Wang et al. [8] have reported their results. We developed ABIDES as a fresh implementation to incorporate
lessons learned from the deployment of prior platforms. With ABIDES, we aim to address Freidman’s primary concern
regarding computerized market simulations – that strategies must be exogenously speciﬁed – with a platform enabling
powerful learning agents to easily participate in a realistically structured market via a common framework. We believe
arXiv:1904.12066v1  [cs.MA]  26 Apr 2019
ABIDES: Towards High-Fidelity Market Simulation for AI Research
A PREPRINT
this is necessary to properly investigate the behavior and impact of intelligent agents interacting in a complex market
environment.
ABIDES is intended to be a curated, collaborative open-source project that provides researchers with tools that support
the rapid prototyping and evaluation of complex market agents. With it, we hope to to further empower researchers
of ﬁnancial markets to undertake studies which would be difﬁcult or impossible in the ﬁeld, due to the absence of
ﬁne-grained data identiﬁable to individual traders (see Figure 1), a lack of knowledge concerning participant motivation,
and an inability to run controlled “what if” studies against particular historical dates.
Figure 1: Simulation allows agent-identiﬁable data which is lost in the ﬂow of real-world orders.
We acknowledge existing high-quality academically-targeted multi-agent market simulators such as that used by
X. Wang and Wellman. In a recent study they used their simulation platform to study spooﬁng agents in a market
environment populated by zero intelligence (ZI) and heuristic belief learning (HBL) traders [9]. Their approach analyzes
the results from an empirical game-theoretic view [10]. We believe ABIDES makes a complementary contribution
through its experimental focus on the “market physics” of the real world including:
• Support for continuous double-auction trading at the same nanosecond time resolution as real markets such as
NASDAQ;
• Ability to simulate speciﬁc dates in market history with gated access to historical data;
• Variable electronic network latency and agent computation delays;
• Requirement that all agents intercommunicate solely by means of standardized message protocols;
• Easy implementation of complex agents through a full-featured hierarchy of base agent classes.
The focus on these features should enable an expanded range of experimental studies. We believe ABIDES is also the
ﬁrst full-featured, modern market simulator to be shared with the community as an open source project.
2
Important Questions Simulation Can Help Us Address
ABIDES can support a number of different kinds of investigations into market behavior that are not easily conducted
using historical data or live experiments.
• The beneﬁts of co-location: In the past 20 years hedge funds and other market participants have invested
in the deployment of computing resources co-located at major exchanges [11]. This so-called “co-location”
enables quicker access to market information than if the trading server were located further away. It is not
feasible to investigate the value of the advantage co-location provides with available historical data, because it
does not include information about the geographic location, network latency, or network reliability of each
actor. With a platform that does not require formal arms-length messaging using a realistic network model,
we cannot simulate the effects of these factors even if they are known. ABIDES provides a network model
and mandatory messaging protocol that enables detailed experiments in this area: Creating a population of
2

=== END OF {name} ===
ABIDES: Towards High-Fidelity Market Simulation for AI Research
A PREPRINT
The impact trader has a clear effect on the market, despite the background agents’ central tendency to arbitrage the price
toward historical levels, and the impact grows larger proportionally with its market bid size. The change is particularly
noticeable in the cyclical peaks of the auction. Due to the price elevation it caused, the impact trader’s total proﬁt
increased with the size of its bid from an average of $2,633 with greed = 0.3 to $12,502 with greed = 1.9. However
its proﬁt per share declined from $2.14 to $1.60. We found a correlation between proﬁt per share and trade size of
r = −0.31 across sixty experimental trials.
It is useful to consider these market impacts in aggregate across multiple experimental examples. ABIDES makes it
easy to produce study plots from logged simulation data. Figure 7 shows a time-aligned event study of many impact
trades at different times, on different days, to illustrate the range of likely price effects after the time of impact.
7
Conclusion and Future Challenges
We presented the design and implementation of ABIDES, a high-ﬁdelity equity market simulator. ABIDES provides an
environment within which complex research questions regarding trading agents and market behavior can be investigated.
The simulation is demonstrated in two case studies. The ﬁrst case study shows how previous intra-day transaction histo-
ries are closely reproduced by a population of interacting background trading agents communicating with an exchange
agent. These background agents are designed to provide a realistic market environment into which experimental agents
can be injected. The second case study illustrates how large market orders impact simulated prices not just immediately,
but for a signiﬁcant period after the order arrives at the exchange. It is also intended to demonstrate the experimental
potential of the ABIDES platform.
We now have a robust simulation environment in which to develop and experiment with more complex trading agents,
including those based on approaches in machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence.
8
Open Source Access and License
ABIDES is available through GitHub at https://github.com/abides-sim/abides under the BSD 3-clause license.
9
Acknowledgements
This material is based upon research supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1741026.
12
ABIDES: Towards High-Fidelity Market Simulation for AI Research
A PREPRINT
References
[1] BANKS, J. Handbook of simulation: principles, methodology, advances, applications, and practice. John
Wiley & Sons, 1998.
[2] FREIDMAN, D. The double auction market institution: A survey. The Double Auction Market Institutions,
Theories and Evidence, Addison Wesley (1993).
[3] GODE, D. K., AND SUNDER, S. Allocative efﬁciency of markets with zero-intelligence traders: Market as
a partial substitute for individual rationality. Journal of political economy 101, 1 (1993), 119–137.
[4] MCKINNEY, W., ET AL. Data structures for statistical computing in python. In Proceedings of the 9th
Python in Science Conference (2010), vol. 445, Austin, TX, pp. 51–56.
[5] NASDAQ OMX GROUP.
NASDAQ TotalView - ITCH 5.0.
http://www.nasdaqtrader.com/
content/technicalsupport/specifications/dataproducts/NQTVITCHSpecification.pdf.
Accessed: 2018-10-25.
[6] NASDAQ OMX GROUP.
O*U*C*H Version 4.2.
http://www.nasdaqtrader.com/content/
technicalsupport/specifications/TradingProducts/OUCH4.2.pdf. Accessed: 2018-10-25.
[7] OLIPHANT, T. E. A guide to NumPy, vol. 1. Trelgol Publishing USA, 2006.
[8] WANG, J., GEORGE, V., BALCH, T., AND HYBINETTE, M. Stockyard: A discrete event-based stock
market exchange simulator. In Simulation Conference (WSC), 2017 Winter (2017), IEEE, pp. 1193–1203.
[9] WANG, X., AND WELLMAN, M. P. Spooﬁng the limit order book: An agent-based model. In Proceedings
of the 16th Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems (2017), International Foundation
for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pp. 651–659.
[10] WELLMAN, M. P. Methods for empirical game-theoretic analysis. In AAAI (2006), pp. 1552–1556.
[11] ZOOK, M., AND GROTE, M. H. The microgeographies of global ﬁnance: High-frequency trading and the
construction of information inequality. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 49, 1 (2017),
121–140.
13
